The biggest and coolest hackathon in Scotland.
NOTE CONF
Um, you know, you get to see behind the scenes
in the Tech society of the University of Edinburgh.
NOTE CONF
Um, and you know, that propels you forward.
You can later become and run for president like me.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you can join other committee roles.
You can find research positions, network with, uh, lecturers, academics.
NOTE CONF
So joining the committee propels your university career, just like
on a rocket ship.
NOTE CONF
I really, really recommend it.
So if you want to join our committee, all you
NOTE CONF
have to do is give a one minute speech and
optionally write a manifesto for 200 words.
NOTE CONF
Scan that QR code that's going to go to the
page for our AGM for our election.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
That's it.
NOTE CONF
Come along on October 23rd Informatics forum at 6 p.m..
I hope to see you there.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon everyone.
Um, firstly, I have a small admin announcement.
NOTE CONF
If you're in my tutorial group this afternoon.
Could you come and see me here after the lecture?
NOTE CONF
If you're here and if you're online, please read your
email.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we have I spent some time talking about
2500 year old logic.
NOTE CONF
We're now going to talk about modern logic and the
form of modern logic that we're going to talk about
NOTE CONF
was developed early 20th century building on work from the
19th century.
NOTE CONF
So a couple of the characters involved from the earlier
side of this.
NOTE CONF
This is George Boole, as in Boolean algebra.
So you all know Boolean algebra by now.
NOTE CONF
And this is Charles Pierce, who is an American who
was an American logician and one of the great figures
NOTE CONF
in logic and semiotics from the 19th century and early
20th century.
NOTE CONF
I have an acquaintance who is a fanatical about purse,
so my Facebook feed is full of stuff about purse
NOTE CONF
every day.
And has been for three years.
NOTE CONF
So I want to start by summarising what we've done
so far, and at this point, please ask any clarifying
NOTE CONF
questions from what we've done in the previous three weeks.
So we introduced propositional logic with true and false propositions.
NOTE CONF
And we introduced the Boolean connectives and which I called
and or not and implies or if then we then
NOTE CONF
mentioned predicate logic where we talk about objects in a
universe.
NOTE CONF
So we have a universe big X and we talk
about some object little X inside the universe.
NOTE CONF
And a predicate applies to an object.
So this gives us a boolean true or false value.
NOTE CONF
If a is true of object x And I introduced
mainly for the purpose of saying we weren't going to
NOTE CONF
talk about them yet.
The universal and existential quantifiers, which is what we use
NOTE CONF
in modern logic.
And instead of talking about those, we introduced a modern
NOTE CONF
version of Aristotle's categorical propositions.
So we have sequence of the form.
NOTE CONF
Some predicate entails some other predicate.
And these are statements about all the objects in a
NOTE CONF
universe.
So there's an implicit universal quantification for every x in
NOTE CONF
the universe.
A of x implies b of x.
NOTE CONF
And as I said, that gives us Aristotle's four categorical
propositions.
NOTE CONF
Every a is b, no a is B, some a
is B, some a is not b.
NOTE CONF
And we went through that and you did lots of
exercises with Venn diagrams, and you did a little bit
NOTE CONF
of work on proving stuff in the tutorial exercise that
you've just submitted.
NOTE CONF
And to do that, we used rules that let us
derive new sequence from old ones.
NOTE CONF
We started with our fundamental syllogism, Barbara, which we take
to be self-evidently true.
NOTE CONF
We had double negation.
We had contra position in a sequence.
NOTE CONF
And remember contra position is negate and flip.
And we had contra position in a rule where we
NOTE CONF
could take one of the premises and negate and flip
it with the conclusion.
NOTE CONF
And that gave us basically a view in modern logical
notation of Aristotle's syllogisms.
NOTE CONF
And moreover, we did them slightly better than Aristotle, because
we understand them better than he did, although his understanding
NOTE CONF
was remarkable for the time.
So are there any questions or comments at all hanging
NOTE CONF
over from the last couple of weeks of what we've
been doing before we go on?
NOTE CONF
Now, if you've all done the tutorials, so hopefully everything
is reasonably happy.
NOTE CONF
So what I want to do now is take the
notion of sequent and enrich it a bit.
NOTE CONF
So we've dealt with sequence that were specifically designed to
deal with Aristotle's things.
NOTE CONF
Now we're going to think about what else we could
say using the sequent notation.
NOTE CONF
So I've introduced not and and or as operations on
two propositional things.
NOTE CONF
They take two two values and give you back a
truth value.
NOTE CONF
There's a natural thing you can do, which is to
say that if I have a predicate, then I can
NOTE CONF
do a boolean operation on a predicate.
For example, you've just done things that talk about blue
NOTE CONF
amber squares.
So I can think about the single predicate is blue
NOTE CONF
and is amber, which is a kind of obvious compound
predicate which I can apply to any object.
NOTE CONF
And it's true if the thing is amber and if
it's blue.
NOTE CONF
So notionally speaking, this looks like many things, useful things.
In mathematics it looks like a bit of notational trickery.
NOTE CONF
This thing here, these are two predicates A and b.
And this is the conjunction the predicate a and b.
NOTE CONF
How do I define the meaning of that?
Well, I simply say that the meaning of a and
NOTE CONF
b applied to x is a apply to x and
be applied to x.
NOTE CONF
So completely unsurprising, which is how all good mathematical definitions
should be.
NOTE CONF
And I can do the same with or A or
B is a single compound predicate, is square, or is
NOTE CONF
a disc.
And if I apply that to an object x, I
NOTE CONF
get the or of a of x, p of x
is square of x, or is disc of x.
NOTE CONF
Mathematicians call this operation lifting.
So this is the lifted not operator.
NOTE CONF
This is the lifted.
And operator and this is the lifted all operator.
NOTE CONF
Um, why do they call it lifting.
It's some kind of idea that true and false are
NOTE CONF
the ground values.
They're the ground floor of the mathematical building where constructing
NOTE CONF
the next level up is predicates.
And so we lift our operations to work on the
NOTE CONF
next level up.
And you can keep lifting further if you wish.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about that idea?
Is it a natural idea?
NOTE CONF
It's what we do in English anyway.
So.
NOTE CONF
Okay, we will see what we do with these in
a moment.
NOTE CONF
Because now I want to think a little bit about
what have we got in a sequence.
NOTE CONF
The sequence we've introduced have a predicate on the left
and a predicate on the right.
NOTE CONF
Now when we were doing manipulations, we assume that these
things were all what we called atomic predicates, except that
NOTE CONF
we also allowed negated predicates.
So remember we argued that the thing about furry snakes
NOTE CONF
was just an instance of Barbara because it had a
not furry in it instead of a furry, and that
NOTE CONF
still fits into the scheme of Barbara.
So if we can put not of a predicate to
NOTE CONF
the left or right of a sequent, then we can
put the end of a predicate to the left or
NOTE CONF
right of a sequent, or the all of the predicate.
So, for example, here is a piece of reasoning.
NOTE CONF
It's written in a logistic form.
It's not one of Aristotle's syllogisms because I've got an
NOTE CONF
and here so we can read this.
Every line is big, for example, and every line is
NOTE CONF
fierce.
From that we can conclude that every line is big
NOTE CONF
and fierce.
And for those of you who liked the Venn diagram
NOTE CONF
stuff, there's a kind of Venn diagram summary of the
syllogism.
NOTE CONF
So I take it that you agree with this piece
of reasoning.
NOTE CONF
Anybody have any worries about this piece of reasoning?
Does it really?
NOTE CONF
I've written this double line here.
Do you remember what the double line means?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Anybody not remember what the double line means?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Means the rule goes both ways.
NOTE CONF
So if you give me these two, then I can
conclude the conclusion.
NOTE CONF
Conversely, if you give me the conclusion, I can derive
the premises.
NOTE CONF
So does that work.
We should actually check it work.
NOTE CONF
So I've written it down.
So you should check everything I write down because I
NOTE CONF
might make a mistake.
If I know that every line is big and fierce,
NOTE CONF
then I certainly I know that every line is big,
and I know that every line is fierce.
NOTE CONF
So the rule works both ways round.
Okay, so are you happy for us to continue working
NOTE CONF
with reasoning with a slightly richer notion of predicate on
the right.
NOTE CONF
You were basically doing this in the tutorial anyway, so
one of those nice instances where we designed the tutorial
NOTE CONF
to feed into the next week.
Um, what I've done here is use a conjunct predicate,
NOTE CONF
an and predicate on the right of a sequent.
I could also think about enriching sequence on the left.
NOTE CONF
So here's another rule.
This one is supposed to say something like every lion
NOTE CONF
is fierce, every tiger is fierce.
Everything that is either a lion or a tiger is
NOTE CONF
fierce.
Is that a valid piece of reasoning?
NOTE CONF
Yes, yes.
Thumbs up.
NOTE CONF
Lots of thumbs up.
Anybody worried about it?
NOTE CONF
I think it was as a piece of English.
It's quite natural.
NOTE CONF
Does it work both ways?
Well, if I know that everything that is either a
NOTE CONF
lion or a tiger is fierce, then I know that
tigers are fierce.
NOTE CONF
And I know that lions are fierce.
And so it does work both ways.
NOTE CONF
Again.
Um, you might be wondering, can I say something?
NOTE CONF
About what?
Lion and tiger.
NOTE CONF
This is where logic differs from English.
So in English, if I said all lions and tigers
NOTE CONF
are fierce, you would know what I meant, right?
What would I mean?
NOTE CONF
So forget the logic.
Just in normal English I say all lions and tigers
NOTE CONF
are fierce lions.
Tigers.
NOTE CONF
Right?
So that's one way of putting it.
NOTE CONF
Is there another way I could put it?
I'm trying not to say it without logic.
NOTE CONF
Does it not just say this everything that is a
lion or is a tiger.
NOTE CONF
So there's one of those cases where and and or
in English and Logic are getting a bit mixed up.
NOTE CONF
Um, what is can we talk about the compound predicate?
Lion and tiger.
NOTE CONF
What's the meaning of the compound predicate?
Lion and tiger.
NOTE CONF
Has to be a lion and a tiger.
So arguably the things on the slide in the right
NOTE CONF
satisfy that predicate.
Who knows what a liger is?
NOTE CONF
Who can now guess what a liger is?
Okay, there are ligers and Teigen's.
NOTE CONF
So Elijah is the offspring of a male lion and
a female tiger.
NOTE CONF
A tigress and a Teigen is the other way around.
Um, they're not very happy beasts, but curiously, Teigen's are
NOTE CONF
bigger than either lions or tigers.
So what have I done with this slide and the
NOTE CONF
previous slide?
I've introduced some rules that let us do things with
NOTE CONF
Boolean combinators on predicates.
So this one we had from before.
NOTE CONF
This is contra position.
This is a rule for manipulating negation.
NOTE CONF
If I know that A entails b, I know that
not B entails not a.
NOTE CONF
What I've introduced just now are rules for dealing with
or and and in some places.
NOTE CONF
So A entails C and B entails.
C means that either A or B is sufficient to
NOTE CONF
give you C and vice versa.
If I know C gives you a and c gives
NOTE CONF
you b, I know that c gives you a and
b.
NOTE CONF
So notice here that these rules I've introduced, I've got
all on the left and and on the right.
NOTE CONF
Do you think that's a coincidence that I've started this
way.
NOTE CONF
I mean obviously not.
Anybody remember any magic word that I've mentioned a few
NOTE CONF
times that might be coming into play here?
Magic word stuff here.
NOTE CONF
Not contra position?
No.
NOTE CONF
So it's a word that describes the way in which
knot or land interact.
NOTE CONF
It's going to come up again, so I'll repeat it.
Duality.
NOTE CONF
So I haven't explained precisely what duality means, but we've
seen a couple of examples of it and we're going
NOTE CONF
to see many more.
So it's not a coincidence that these sequence work with
NOTE CONF
all on the left and and on the right.
Because in a sequence, the left hand side is a
NOTE CONF
kind of positive thing.
These are the things we know.
NOTE CONF
And the right hand side.
Well no actually.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
Wrong way round.
NOTE CONF
Right hand side is a positive thing.
And the left hand side is the left hand side
NOTE CONF
of a conditional basically, which is a sort of negative
place.
NOTE CONF
And we'll see much more about that in a bit
later.
NOTE CONF
This raises the question Of.
Can I do anything with and and or on the
NOTE CONF
left or right?
So can I write a sequence that has an and
NOTE CONF
on the left.
And can I write a sequent that has an all
NOTE CONF
on the right?
In order to think about that, I'm going to introduce
NOTE CONF
some notation that you've already seen in Haskell, but we
haven't seen it in logic.
NOTE CONF
So just before I go on, any questions about the
slide so far, the rules that I've been talking about.
NOTE CONF
Quite repetitive slides.
So hopefully not.
NOTE CONF
So you did this in the tutorial.
If you did the optional part, if you didn't do
NOTE CONF
the optional part, then it's time to start thinking about
what it meant.
NOTE CONF
If I write down something like this a comma b
comma c entails d.
NOTE CONF
What do you think a natural thing for that to
mean is.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's always the somebody at the back must have
an idea.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so that's an interesting one.
So it's just in there is that it means that
NOTE CONF
A gives d, b gives d and c gives d
each individually.
NOTE CONF
And the alternative.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So another idea is that what I really mean here
is if you give me all of A, B and
NOTE CONF
C then I can get D.
Now this is notation.
NOTE CONF
So we could define it in whatever way we want.
But in fact what we're actually doing here is interpreting
NOTE CONF
comma as And so one way that this could make
sense, and the way that turns out to make it
NOTE CONF
make quite good sense is to say from the assumptions
A, B and C, I can get D when we
NOTE CONF
do a mathematical proof or a logical piece of reasoning.
Usually we start with a bunch of assumptions.
NOTE CONF
If you're writing down a formal theorem, then these are
the preconditions of the theorem.
NOTE CONF
If you're doing a piece of informal reasoning, then sometimes
you have to find out what the assumptions are as
NOTE CONF
you go along.
But when you finish, you've got some things that you
NOTE CONF
had to assume in order to get your result.
So it's kind of reasonable to say that the basic
NOTE CONF
form of reasoning is give me a bunch of assumptions
on the left and give me what I can prove
NOTE CONF
from it on the right.
Um, have you seen this comma used as an and
NOTE CONF
anywhere else?
People are whispering the answer.
NOTE CONF
Somebody shout the answer.
So I should have bought water, shouldn't I?
NOTE CONF
Haskell list comprehension.
We have in Haskell the set of X drawn from
NOTE CONF
things.
Comma X is blue, x is amber.
NOTE CONF
So that's an example of comma being used for.
And that's what we're going to do here.
NOTE CONF
Um what can we do with that.
Does this let us do anything useful.
NOTE CONF
Why would we write a comma b, comma c instead
of writing a and b and c?
NOTE CONF
Well, if we think about what we could try to
do, what we would like to do is produce rules
NOTE CONF
that let us reason about statements like that.
And if you try to do that, you'll find that
NOTE CONF
it doesn't work as nicely as it did when we
had and on the right of the sequent.
NOTE CONF
So here are two rules.
Which of them is true and which of them is
NOTE CONF
false?
If A and B gives me D, then sorry.
NOTE CONF
If a comma B gives me d, then a and
b gives me d.
NOTE CONF
That's true by definition, because I've said that I mean
and by comma.
NOTE CONF
But this thing that you might think should be true.
Is a one way rule, not a two way rule.
NOTE CONF
So think about what this says A gives me D
and B gives me d.
NOTE CONF
From that I conclude that a and b gives me
d.
NOTE CONF
Is that right?
So that's.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Anybody worried about that?
NOTE CONF
Does it work backwards?
It feels like gladiatorial combat.
NOTE CONF
Why doesn't it.
So somebody who hasn't already said that it doesn't.
NOTE CONF
Why does the backwards rule not work?
Because it can be in a, um um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, this.
So the conclusion here says that if I know both
NOTE CONF
A and B, then I can get D, but it
may well be that I actually need both A and
NOTE CONF
B, and neither of them is enough by themselves.
So running this rule backwards would say that if I
NOTE CONF
knew that given A and B together, I can get
D, then I can separately get that A gives me
NOTE CONF
D and B gives me D, and that's simply not
true.
NOTE CONF
So your exercise is to come up with a little
example for that one.
NOTE CONF
Using any of our favourite universes or topics to demonstrate
that it doesn't make sense.
NOTE CONF
Um, nonetheless, these rules are both useful in their ways.
But what's the point of taking an and and splitting
NOTE CONF
it into commas?
What I'm trying to do here is work towards a
NOTE CONF
system where I can take a big, complicated formula, a
big, complicated sequence on the bottom with a predicate on
NOTE CONF
the left with lots of ands and ors and nots,
and a predicate on the right with lots of ands
NOTE CONF
and ors and nots.
And then we want to break it down so that
NOTE CONF
we can do a reasoned argument showing that it's true
from simple assumptions.
NOTE CONF
Um.
It's a little bit complex when we actually do a
NOTE CONF
proof, which will be tomorrow with a bit of luck.
Not today.
NOTE CONF
You'll see that it can be a bit of a
mess to write down, which is why it's good to
NOTE CONF
have computers doing it.
But even setting up the notation for it takes a
NOTE CONF
little more work than we have been doing.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So are you all currently more or less happy with
the idea that I can say I have a bunch
NOTE CONF
of assumptions, and they give me a conclusion as a
sequence.
NOTE CONF
I.
Assume so.
NOTE CONF
What does that mean?
What does it mean to say from.
NOTE CONF
No assumptions at all.
I can get d anything, anything entails d.
NOTE CONF
Yep.
So if nothing entails D, then certainly anything else entails
NOTE CONF
D.
Um, is there a shorter way of saying what that
NOTE CONF
says about D?
D is just true.
NOTE CONF
We don't need any assumptions.
It's a fact of life.
NOTE CONF
How can we argue that formally?
Well, let's just expand the notation.
NOTE CONF
What do I mean.
So by blank entails D I mean the empty set
NOTE CONF
of assumptions entails d.
Now when I write a bunch of assumptions on the
NOTE CONF
left, on the left, we just agreed that what I
meant was the end of the set of assumptions.
NOTE CONF
And now we come back to something I think we
discussed in the first lecture, or maybe the second lecture.
NOTE CONF
What is the end of the empty set of assumptions?
It's true.
NOTE CONF
Why is it true?
Because when you take two propositions and add them together,
NOTE CONF
you're making the set of true things smaller.
So each time I put another and in, I reduce
NOTE CONF
the number of things that are true.
So when I have nothing at all in my bunch
NOTE CONF
of ands, I'd better start with everything that is true.
So again, this is one of these things that you
NOTE CONF
need to be remembering.
The end of the empty set is true.
NOTE CONF
So this comes down to saying true entails d.
In other words, d is simply true by itself.
NOTE CONF
So that's what that means.
So this looks like we're just playing games with the
NOTE CONF
notation, but we're not really playing games because we're.
Deducing stuff that has to follow if we interpret the
NOTE CONF
notation in the way that we've defined it so far.
This is also a common feature in logic and mathematics.
NOTE CONF
You define a notation in a way that makes sense
in the case you were thinking of, and then that
NOTE CONF
forces you to interpret in interpret it in some rather
specialist cases that perhaps you weren't thinking of.
NOTE CONF
We certainly weren't thinking about empty sets of n of
premises when we define the notation, or at least I
NOTE CONF
wasn't.
Um, so that's an argument that it makes sense to
NOTE CONF
write sets of things on the left of a sequent.
Um, if I can write sets on the left of
NOTE CONF
a sequence, then surely I can write sets on the
right of a sequent.
NOTE CONF
But I have to say what I mean by it.
Bearing in mind the magic word, what do you think
NOTE CONF
I might.
Sensibly mean by comma on the right of a sequent?
NOTE CONF
Or how many people were going to shout out or
if they'd had a bit more time?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so again, by the end of the course, hopefully
you will have a deep understanding of duality.
NOTE CONF
But in the meantime remember that.
And on the left behaves like all on the right.
NOTE CONF
And this is a fact of the way we're defining
things.
NOTE CONF
So if I write a entails d comma e, then
I claim that it should mean a entails either d
NOTE CONF
e, but I don't actually have a choice about it
because I have rules that let me derive that.
NOTE CONF
So here's a trick that shows you that I don't
have a choice.
NOTE CONF
It has to mean, or I can do control position
on this.
NOTE CONF
So if I want this to behave sensibly, this is
a single proposition.
NOTE CONF
So these are propositions.
So I want to be able to take them to
NOTE CONF
the left and swap them with their a move each
proposition to the left negate it.
NOTE CONF
Move that proposition to the right negate it.
So if this means something, it should mean the same
NOTE CONF
as this.
This means the same as that because that's how we've
NOTE CONF
just defined comma on the left.
That means not of the or because duality again.
NOTE CONF
This is the end of the not.
And this is the not of the ORS.
NOTE CONF
So many of you use that in your tutorial exercise
where you are writing down a piece of hassle code.
NOTE CONF
For some, something is something you wrote.
It was something of the form.
NOTE CONF
And you were.
Something that looked like that.
NOTE CONF
Um.
How many of you remember writing something like that?
NOTE CONF
I know I saw least five examples out of six
in my tutorials, so I think it must be many
NOTE CONF
more of you.
Um, curiously, you didn't have to do that.
NOTE CONF
That was a slightly tricky question, because.
I asked you to.
NOTE CONF
Define this thing in terms of Haskell and and or
so that you would write all A or B as
NOTE CONF
an and of a list.
And then I asked you to define that.
NOTE CONF
Um, you could just have negated the answer of that
because this is just the negation of that.
NOTE CONF
But a lot of people, which is indeed what I
really hoped you would do, decided to write it out
NOTE CONF
using AWS and not if you did the other thing
then well done.
NOTE CONF
Think about that too.
So this law here is an example of something that
NOTE CONF
you may know from propositional logic.
Who has seen De Morgan's laws in propositional logic.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So about 20%.
NOTE CONF
We will see them again at great length.
So that was a piece of valid propositional reasoning.
NOTE CONF
And then I can flip that over to the other
side and flip the over to this side using contra
NOTE CONF
position.
And so actually I have no choice but to say
NOTE CONF
a entails d comma E is supposed to mean a
entails d or e.
NOTE CONF
Which is a slightly odd thing to say, because normally
when we do reasoning, we have a kind of single
NOTE CONF
proposition that we want to conclude at the end, at
least if we're trying to do simple reasoning.
NOTE CONF
But if you think about the kind of reasoning you
do in mathematics, quite often, you will end up proving
NOTE CONF
that either something is true of your number or something
else is true of a number.
NOTE CONF
Or if you are doing legal reasoning or tax reasoning,
which as I've said, is a very interesting domain for
NOTE CONF
logic, you often end up saying, either I can get
this tax perk or I can get this tax perk,
NOTE CONF
or possibly both, but maybe not.
Um, so any questions about this?
NOTE CONF
Do you believe my argument so far that I have
no choice about what it means?
NOTE CONF
It's always good if you have no choice because it
means you're doing things right.
NOTE CONF
Um, so now we have a rule that lets us
look at and and on the left or on or
NOTE CONF
on the right and break it apart into separate propositions,
which we write down as commas.
NOTE CONF
Now, again, we have the question what does it mean
to write that?
NOTE CONF
So if I write from D, I get.
No propositions.
NOTE CONF
There's only one thing it can mean.
What's the only thing it can mean?
NOTE CONF
D is false.
So if I had it the other way one nothing
NOTE CONF
entails d, it meant d is true.
If I flip it to the other side.
NOTE CONF
The magic word duality.
What's the dual of true?
NOTE CONF
It's false.
And again I can do the same piece of reasoning.
NOTE CONF
D entails nothing, means D entails nothing.
The empty set, which means d entails the or of
NOTE CONF
the empty set.
What's the or of the empty set?
NOTE CONF
Again, when I all things together, I make more things
true.
NOTE CONF
So when I start with no propositions, the all of
no propositions is false.
NOTE CONF
Nothing is true.
Um, so I've already said that you are seeing a
NOTE CONF
pattern between the left and right of an of entails,
and you're going to see quite a lot more of
NOTE CONF
it over the next couple of weeks.
Okay, so I've defined quite a lot of notation and
NOTE CONF
quite a lot of ideas.
Is that question here.
NOTE CONF
Why do we.
Have.
NOTE CONF
Um, because just on the previous slide, I argue that
comma on the right of a sequence has to mean
NOTE CONF
or in the same way that on the left.
So I said it meant and on the left.
NOTE CONF
On the right it has to mean or because contra
position lets me flip things from back to side.
NOTE CONF
And when I flip around to the other side, it
becomes an Or.
NOTE CONF
And so if I think about so my definition of
what it means for D to entail a set of
NOTE CONF
assumptions is that V entails the all of all the
assumptions on the right and the or of no assumptions
NOTE CONF
at all is false.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Other questions requests for further clarification.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this was introducing notation and a meaning for notation
and some definitions.
NOTE CONF
We are now entering the 20th century.
Finally I've talked about sequence bunches of things on the
NOTE CONF
left and bunches of things on the right.
So I can think about writing some kind of super
NOTE CONF
general sequence where I just have a set of formulas
on the left, which I write as a list because
NOTE CONF
it's easier to write things down as a list, but
it's really a set.
NOTE CONF
And when you do it in Haskell, you're going to
be using lists because it's convenient.
NOTE CONF
But really, they're standing for sets and we have a
bunch on the right.
NOTE CONF
How many of you know your Greek alphabet off by
heart?
NOTE CONF
Right.
That's a lot of you who have a lot of
NOTE CONF
learning to do, because mathematicians are addicted to Greek letters,
and your life will be much easier if you just
NOTE CONF
learn them all.
And things could be very much worse.
NOTE CONF
There are many other much richer alphabets that we could
use.
NOTE CONF
Um, there is one Russian letter that is used in
mathematics reasonably frequently, but only one.
NOTE CONF
So this is gamma and this is delta.
Um, I think some of you are engineers.
NOTE CONF
You'll probably see Gammas and Deltas kicking around the engineering
maths as well.
NOTE CONF
There's a notational convention that mathematicians and logicians in particular
tend to use, so we tend to use uppercase Greek
NOTE CONF
letters to talk about sets of things and lowercase Greek
letters to talk about individual things.
NOTE CONF
So for those of you who haven't come across, this
is gamma.
NOTE CONF
This is delta.
And the lowercase forms are.
NOTE CONF
That.
So here.
NOTE CONF
And this is the this is early in the Greek
alphabet.
NOTE CONF
So we usually use things early in the beat in
the alphabet for sets of formulas.
NOTE CONF
So this is an example of how we would write
one of our modern sequence.
NOTE CONF
Updated sequence.
We have a bunch of conclusions on the left, and
NOTE CONF
that means that we assume the end of all of
them.
NOTE CONF
And from that, we can conclude some of the things
on the right, so, so slightly unnatural.
NOTE CONF
It took a little while to generalise to having sets
of things on the right, but it makes things work
NOTE CONF
because it makes things completely symmetrical.
There is a version of this logic where you restrict
NOTE CONF
yourself to only allowing one thing on the right, but
it's nothing like as clean.
NOTE CONF
So this is the kind of sequence that was invented
by Gerhard Jensen.
NOTE CONF
Um.
I don't know, what do you think he looks like?
NOTE CONF
Um.
Very, very clever guy.
NOTE CONF
responsible for much of the foundations of logic and proof
theory in the 20th century.
NOTE CONF
But he had some personal defects as we would see
them.
NOTE CONF
Date of death 1945.
Any guesses about what might have happened in 1945?
NOTE CONF
Um, well, he, uh.
He didn't.
NOTE CONF
He was in the Russian zone of Germany, and Jensen
was actually a reasonably enthusiastic Nazi.
NOTE CONF
And being a prisoner of war in a Russian prison
camp at the end of the Second World War was
NOTE CONF
not a good place for enthusiastic Nazis, so he did
not survive very long.
NOTE CONF
Um, which just goes to show that logicians are not
necessarily nice people, but maybe you know that.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, so what does this mean?
What does the secret mean?
NOTE CONF
As I said.
If everything in gamma holds, then something in Delta holds.
NOTE CONF
Am I going to continue or am I going to
stop now?
NOTE CONF
I'll continue for a little bit.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I want to think a little bit more about what
this comma means, as we might use it in everyday
NOTE CONF
logical reasoning.
Because on the face of it, then why do we
NOTE CONF
want to know that something in Delta holds?
Generally, you want to know that something specific holds.
NOTE CONF
One way to split it apart is to say, well,
what are we saying?
NOTE CONF
We're saying if we know the end of the things
on the left, then we can conclude the all of
NOTE CONF
the things on the right and the common notation lets
us split these things into different parts that might be
NOTE CONF
of interest to us.
So often the way to think about it is not
NOTE CONF
to think of g a as being simply g and
A, and not to think of some big set gamma
NOTE CONF
and gamma comma A being all the things in gamma
together with a.
NOTE CONF
But to think about gamma as the set of assumptions
that you're currently working with.
NOTE CONF
And A is one of the things that you're actually
working on at the moment.
NOTE CONF
So typically a step in a proof says I've got
a bunch of assumptions, gamma that I've been working with
NOTE CONF
all the way along.
And they're not changing as I do the proof.
NOTE CONF
And then I've got some assumption A that I'm actually
working with in order to try to get my conclusion
NOTE CONF
be?
What does this mean?
NOTE CONF
Kind of.
It means I'm restricting the reasoning about A and B
NOTE CONF
to a part of the universe that behaves nicely.
So one way to read this sequence is to say
NOTE CONF
in the bit of the universe where gamma holds.
So the nice green part of this universe, for example,
NOTE CONF
then I know that a comma B is true.
So it lets me write kind of a more general
NOTE CONF
Venn diagram kind of universe.
Split the universe into the good part gamma and the
NOTE CONF
good part where gamma doesn't hold.
And then I'm doing my A entails B reasoning only
NOTE CONF
inside the green bit of the universe.
Why do we want to do this?
NOTE CONF
Because in any normal form of reasoning or in any
yes, any normal form of reasoning, especially in mathematical or
NOTE CONF
logical reasoning.
Then usually there's an enormous amount of material that is,
NOTE CONF
strictly speaking, part of your assumptions, but you don't want
to be thinking about it as your assumptions.
NOTE CONF
Um, so for example.
Let's take my favourite example of tax law.
NOTE CONF
There are tens of thousands of pages of tax legislation.
They're all part of the assumptions you have when you're
NOTE CONF
trying to work out how much tax you pay.
But in most cases, they're part of the background, and
NOTE CONF
you don't need those specific things at the front of
your mind, although maybe you might need one of them.
NOTE CONF
When you dig into the details to deal with the
tax perk you're actually trying to get.
NOTE CONF
Sorry about that.
That's because I'm not plugged in.
NOTE CONF
Um.
This is why I hate outlook.
NOTE CONF
Because it puts things in my calendar without my consent
and then flashes them up at me.
NOTE CONF
Um, that's why I hate Microsoft in general.
But, um, so a typical piece of reasoning has a
NOTE CONF
bunch of assumptions that are carried throughout the proof, more
or less unchanged together with the bits you're actually working
NOTE CONF
on.
And I think we will make that as a statement
NOTE CONF
for the end of today.
And then when we start tomorrow, we'll see an example
NOTE CONF
of manipulating under assumptions.
And then we'll go on to see more about the
NOTE CONF
sequent calculus.
And if I'm lucky, we might even get to finishing
NOTE CONF
the proof.
So just to warn you, it quite often happens that
NOTE CONF
this lecture tends to run over into the next week.
How many of you are feeling that all this is
NOTE CONF
going quite fast?
How many of you feeling?
NOTE CONF
It's really going a bit too fast.
Okay, who feels it's going too slowly?
NOTE CONF
Okay, well, many of you will be relatively relieved to
know we're going to slowly wind down for a bit.
NOTE CONF
So this week is continuing at the pace.
Then week five will relax a bit.
NOTE CONF
Week six will relax a bit because we need some
revision time and we need some examples classes.
NOTE CONF
And we all need a break in week six right?
See you tomorrow.
NOTE CONF
And anybody from my tutorial group, please come and have
a word with me now.
NOTE CONF